# Biological Data Analysis Repository

**Welcome to the Biological Data Analysis repository!**

This repository contains a collection of Jupyter notebooks designed to simplify the analysis of biological data.

## Notebook Descriptions

### 1. AnnoRate: Hit Rate Comparison

This notebook analyzes the hit percentages for sequences across various databases. It evaluates the performance of a database in comparison to an input transcriptome. The notebook accepts a Fasta-format transcriptome file and a TSV-format alignment output from tools like Diamond or BLAST. It calculates hit percentages and generates a summary table, aiding users in assessing database coverage and specificity. This analysis helps select the most suitable database for a specific analysis.

### 2. AnnoReport: Multi-database Annotation Summary

This notebook is capable of generating summary reports in XSLX or TSV format, consolidating the annotation results of a specific transcriptome obtained by running alignment software (Diamond and BLAST) against various sequence databases. Additionally, this notebook can create links to the accession numbers for the input transcript sequences that mapped to the database, as well as resources on the NCBI and UniProt portals.

### 3.AnnoViz: A Jupyter Notebook for Enhanced Annotation Result Interpretation

This notebook takes as input the output file generated by annotation software (BLAST or Diamond) and creates graphs that provide an interpretation of the annotation and alignment results. It offers valuable insights into the transcripts that have mapped to the database.

### 4. Busco result plots

This notebook enables the bioinformatician who has conducted a genomic analysis with the BUSCO software to obtain graphs and insights based on the results from the BUSCO software. In particular through 

### 5. MultiVenn: A Jupyter Notebook for Comparing Annotation Results Across Databases Using Venn Diagrams

Venn diagrams are a powerful visualization tool used in many areas of research, including bioinformatics. They are typically used to show the overlap between different sets or categories of data. In the context of omics data analysis, Venn diagrams can help identify common or unique hits across multiple databases or analyses, providing insights into the relationships between different datasets. In addition to the traditional Venn diagram, there are also variations such as Euler diagrams and Edwards-Venn diagrams, which can provide different types of visual representations of the data.

This notebook is able to interpret tab-separated value (TSV) files resulting from annotation software (BLAST/Diamond) and allows the generation of Venn diagrams that visualize the distribution of hits for each sequence in different databases. This allows biologists or bioinformaticians to verify the common hits among databases and how the matches are distributed.

### 6. OrthoFinder result plots: A Jupyter Notebook for generating meaningful graphs and plots about your OrthoFinder data

OrthoFinder provides various information and results that are valuable for the analysis of orthologous gene families across different genomes.
With this notebook you can generate meaningful insight based on OrthoFinder results data. 

In particular, you can:

1. **Orthologous Gene Groups Venn diagram:** OrthoFinder identifies orthologous gene groups, which are sets of genes that share a common evolutionary ancestry and perform similar functions in different species. These groups are referred to as "ortholog clusters. The notebook can generate a Venn diagram that collect all Orthogroups.

2. **Phylogenetic Trees:** For each ortholog cluster, OrthoFinder generates phylogenetic trees that depict the evolutionary relationships among orthologous genes in different species. This notebook provide a graphical representation of tree-based evolutionary relationships.

3. **Orthologue multiplicity:** It quantifies how many orthologous genes from different species are grouped together due to their shared evolutionary ancestry and similar functions. With this notebook you can plot these informations in a graphical way through a multi-label barplot.

4. **Descriptive Statistics:** OrthoFinder offers descriptive statistics, such as the total number of ortholog clusters, the number of clusters with one gene from each species, and other useful metrics. This notebook can create a summary table with all these statistics.


## Uploading Files from Your Local Filesystem

1. **Click on the Binder Link**: Start by clicking on the Binder link provided in the repository's README. This will launch a virtual Jupyter Lab environment in your web browser.

2. **Access Jupyter Lab**: Once the Jupyter Lab environment is loaded, you will have access to a Jupyter Lab interface.

3. **Upload Files**:
    - In the Jupyter Lab interface, navigate to the directory where you want to upload files.
    - Click on the "Upload Files" button.
    - Select the files you wish to upload from your local filesystem.
    - The selected files will be uploaded to the chosen directory in your Jupyter Lab environment.

## Transferring Files from an HPC Cluster Using `scp`

1. **Access Jupyter Lab on Binder**: Follow the steps mentioned above to launch Jupyter Lab on Binder.

2. **Open a Terminal in Jupyter Lab**:
    - In Jupyter Lab, click on "File" in the top menu.
    - Select "New" and then choose "Terminal."
    - This will open a terminal window within Jupyter Lab.

3. **Use `scp` Command for File Transfer**:
    - To transfer files from an HPC cluster to your Jupyter Lab environment, use the `scp` command.
    - The basic syntax for copying a file from a remote server to your Jupyter Lab environment is as follows:
      ```bash
      scp username@remote_server:/path/to/remote/file ./files/
      ```
      Replace `username`, `remote_server`, `/path/to/remote/file`, and `./files/` with the appropriate values.
    
4. **Download Files from HPC to Jupyter Lab**:
    - Execute the `scp` command in the Jupyter Lab terminal, and it will copy the file from the HPC cluster to your Jupyter Lab environment.
    
5. **Access Your Downloaded Files**:
    - Once the file transfer is complete, you can access and work with the downloaded files within Jupyter Lab.

Please note that for using `scp`, you need to have appropriate access and credentials to the remote HPC cluster. Ensure that you replace placeholders in the `scp` command with actual values relevant to your setup.

With these steps, you can seamlessly manage files, upload from your local filesystem, and transfer files to and from an HPC cluster while working in the Jupyter Lab environment on Binder.


Happy analyzing!
